The Latest: War in Ukraine: Brazil Embraces China’s Stance on War in Ukraine
Give this article
Near BakhmutUkrainian soldiers on the western outskirts of Bakhmut.
Mauricio Lima for The New York Times
Chasiv YarA Ukrainian Army medic awaiting radio calls.
Mauricio Lima for The New York Times
Chasiv YarUkrainian soldiers in an armored vehicle.
Mauricio Lima for The New York Times
Near BakhmutUkrainian servicemen observe Russian positions from a trench.
Anatolii Stepanov/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
KyivPeople attend the funeral service of a Ukrainian soldier.
Roman Pilipey/Getty Images
KyivPeople at an Easter egg painting workshop.
Roman Pilipey/Getty Images
Chasiv YarA damaged school.
Mauricio Lima for The New York Times
Chasiv YarA resident talks to a Ukrainian soldier.
Mauricio Lima for The New York Times
President Xi Jinping of China, left, and Brazil’s president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, Friday in Beijing.
Credit...
Pool photo by Ken Ishii
BEIJING — China’s top leader, Xi Jinping, and President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva of Brazil, meeting in Beijing and presenting themselves as potential mediators for the war in Ukraine,declared on Friday that negotiation was “the only viable way out of the crisis” there.

In a joint statement, Mr. Xi and Mr. Lula avoided the words “invasion” or “war” and offered few specifics about how to bring Russia or Ukraine to the table after more than a year of war.

But Mr. da Silva said he supported China’s framework for ending the war in Ukraine, which does not call for Russia to withdraw its troops. He also called for China’s territorial integrity to be respected with regards to Taiwan, a similar stance to the one President Emmanuel Macron of France took last weekend after he met with Mr. Xi in China.

The joint statement said that on Ukraine, “Brazil positively received the Chinese proposal, which offers reflections conducive to the search for a peaceful way out of the crisis.” The statement also said that the two leaders agreed that “dialogue and negotiation” were the only way to end the crisis and that China “welcomed Brazil’s efforts toward peace.”

American and some European officials and have been critical of China’s 12-point outline of issues that should be considered in a peace agreement, because China has not suggested that Russian forces must leave occupied Ukrainian territory as part of any deal.

Brazil and China’s joint statement was much more direct about the territorial integrity of China, which was defined to include Taiwan, a self-ruled island democracy over which mainland China claims sovereignty. “The Chinese side expressed great appreciation in this regard,” the relevant passage of the statement concluded.

Moritz Rudolf, a specialist in China’s foreign policy at Yale Law School, said that the statement showed that Beijing is having some success in arguing that Taiwan and Ukraine should be handled separately by the international community. Chinese officials argue that Taiwan is part of a single Chinese nation that requires territorial integrity.

But China sees Ukraine and Russia as two separate United Nations members for which “legitimate security concerns” on the part of Russia may make acceptable the use of force.

“Brazil as a country is more and more in line with the Chinese narrative,” Mr. Rudolf said.

Mr. Lula arrived in Brazil this week with powerful incentives to accommodate China’s interests. In recent weeks, the Brazilian leader has suggested that China should be part of a global effort to bring about peace talks, arguing that countries not directly involved in the conflict are better positioned to mediate the negotiations.

Mr. Lula introduced the idea of a peace group formed by such countries, and recently told President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine that he would discuss the idea with Mr. Xi, making Mr. Lula the latest in a string of leaders offering a vision for possible negotiations.

Mr. Lula has condemned President Vladimir V. Putin’s invasion of Ukraine, but he has also suggested in the past that Mr. Zelensky and NATO shared some blame for the war. He has refused to sell weapons to Ukraine in an effort to maintain neutrality, opting instead to try to help mediate peace.

There have been no known peace talks between Moscow and Kyiv in the past 12 months, and each side insists it has no interest in a cease-fire.

Brazil’s position on the war in Ukraine is complicated by its reliance on Russia for about a quarter of its fertilizer imports, which are crucial to the South American nation’s enormous agriculture industry. Brazil is Russia’s largest buyer of fertilizer, purchasing roughly $1.9 billion in chemicals from Russia in 2019.

Fertilizer is big business for Russia, but is still dwarfed by its oil and gas exports.

Mr. Lula’s visit to China is part of an effort to repair relations that had suffered under Brazil’s previous president, Jair Bolsonaro. Mr. Xi gave President Lula a red-carpet welcome to Beijing complete with military pageantry on Friday.

Foreign Minister Annalena Baerbock of Germany and Foreign Minister Qin Gang of China on Friday in Beijing.
Credit...
Pool photo by Suo Takekuma
Germany and China’s foreign ministers traded sharp words in Beijing on Friday, with Germany’s top diplomat demanding China do more to urge Russia to stop its invasion of Ukraine and her Chinese counterpart quipping that his country did not need a “teacher from the West.”

The German foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, has long had a tough stance toward both Moscow and Beijing, and that came through on Friday during her first diplomatic visit to China.

Ms. Baerbock, a Green Party politician, highlighted Germany’s concerns over military escalation in Taiwan, China’s human rights record and the treatment of German companies in China. She said that Berlin would base its economic cooperation with Beijing not just on its fairness toward German companies, but also on the treatment of the minority Uyghur ethnic group in Xinjiang.

She also was clear about her expectations from Beijing when it came to Russia.

“President Xi’s visit to Moscow showed that no other land has more influence on Russia as China,” she said. “It is good that China has signaled its commitment to a solution, but I have to say frankly that I wonder why the Chinese position so far does not include a call on the aggressor Russia to stop the war.”

Ms. Baerbock’s two-day trip was being closely watched in Europe. She arrived just days after President Emmanuel Macron of France made his own trip to Beijing, where he said that Europe would not be a “follower” of U.S. policy on Taiwan, to the dismay of his allies in Washington and across Europe.

His remarks forced Ms. Baerbock into the uncomfortable position of trying to reposition Europe’s stance. In a news conference with her Chinese counterpart, Qin Gang, she said a military escalation was the “horror scenario” that would send shock waves through countries around the world as well as the global economy.

“We are watching the growing tensions in the Taiwan Strait with great concern,” she said.

Mr. Qin argued that the rising tensions were a result of agitation by “foreign powers.” He also rejected her criticisms of China’s human rights record in China, retorting, “What China needs least is a teacher from the West.”

Show more
The State of the War
The Battle for Bakhmut: Pushed into a shrinking corner of the devastated city, the Ukrainian military is determined to hold out for strategic reasons, even as allies question the cost.
Ukrainian Air Defense: Newly leaked Pentagon documents suggest that Ukraine’s air defense network could fracture without a huge influx of munitions. That outcome could change the course of the war.
Brazil’s Tricky Position: Ukraine wants to buy weapons from Latin America’s largest country. But Brazil, which relies on Russia’s fertilizer and fuel, has repeatedly declined.
Tightening Draft Rules: Russian lawmakers are moving to make it much harder for people to dodge the draft, even as the Kremlin insists that it is not planning a new military conscription.
Video player loading
A drone lands at a Russian A-50 surveillance plane that was later attacked. Credit Credit... Video: Bypol, Graphics: The New York Times
A Ukrainian intelligence agent appears to have gone against President Volodymyr Zelensky’s orders and carried out an attack against a Russian surveillance plane in Belarus in February, according to a newly discovered U.S. intelligence document leaked on Discord.

The strike was allegedly carried out even though the agent had been ordered to stand down after Mr. Zelensky expressed concern that attacking the aircraft could prompt Belarus to join Russia’s war on Ukraine.

The new details have not been previously reported and appear in an undated intelligence document that is marked Top Secret but has not been independently verified by The New York Times.

The document appears to be an intelligence briefing produced by the National Security Agency’s National Security Operations Center.

One part of the document said that Mr. Vasyl Malyuk, who had recently been appointed head of Ukraine’s intelligence agency, Security Service of Ukraine, initially wanted to use an “antimissile system” to strike the Russian aircraft in Belarus, according to the document, but then decided to use drones for the attack, noting that the intelligence agency, also known as S.B.U., had an agent there.

The document said that Mr. Malyuk assured Mr. Zelensky and his chief of staff before the strike that, if no Belarusians were harmed, it would be seen as “legitimate sabotage directed at the Russians.” The president and his top aide, however, were concerned that an S.B.U. strike would give President Aleksandr G. Lukashenko of Belarus “a reason to join Russia’s war against Ukraine,” the document said.

After hearing this, Mr. Malyuk called off the attack, but it went ahead anyway, and Mr. Malyuk later claimed that an agent in Belarus “decided on his own to strike the aircraft,” the document said. He then reportedly assured Mr. Zelensky and his chief of staff that the S.B.U. had been ordered not to carry out the strike and that it likely could not be connected to the agency.

After the incident, a Belarusian opposition group released edited footage taken by a small drone as it landed on the large radar disc of the plan and then took off again. A second drone video shared on Telegram shows the drone landing on the same plane when the feed suddenly cuts off.

The videos suggest a major security gap at Machulishchy air base, south of the Belarusian capital, Minsk.

Image
A satellite image from Feb. 28 shows the Russian A-50 surveillance plane in Belarus, two days after the attack.
Credit...
Maxar Technologies
Russia has less than a dozen early warning and control aircraft in its air force, and they are critical to support air operations in Ukraine. Although the Belarusian opposition group initially said the plane was seriously damaged, a Times analysis of satellite imagery after the attack showed that the damage was limited, including to the sensitive radar disc.

Satellite imagery and a video released by the Belarusian Ministry of Defense showed the plane had left the military base days after the attack, possibly to fly to Russia for repairs.

Credit...
Mauricio Lima for The New York Times
Russian paratrooper units are playing an increasingly active role in the battle for Bakhmut, covering the flanks of Wagner mercenaries as they assault the remaining Ukrainian strongholds in the western part of the city, according to a Russian defense ministry update on Friday.

The ministry’s unverified claims were a rare acknowledgment by Moscow’s military command of joint action efforts with Wagner, whose leader, Yevgeny V. Prigozhin, has repeatedly accused senior generals of starving his forces of ammunition and leaving them exposed to potential Ukrainian counterattacks in the lengthy and bitter fight for Bakhmut in eastern Ukraine.

The battle for Bakhmut began last summer and has become one of Russia’s longest-running assaults since its full-scale invasion of Ukraine more than a year ago. Wagner fighters had spearheaded the battle through last fall and winter. As the fighting has intensified in recent months, Moscow has thrown thousands of men from its armed forces and Wagner into a grinding and often block-by-block battle that has produced heavy casualties for both sides.

In its daily operations update on Friday, the Russian Defense Ministry said Wagner fighters were continuing to storm Bakhmut’s western quarters, adding that “units of paratrooper forces operating on the flanks are providing support” and attacking Ukrainian reinforcements trying to reach the city along the remaining roads.

The ministry’s operational updates regularly make false claims, and the exact role of paratrooper units in Bakhmut was unclear. However, the latest update echoed comments from Britain’s defense intelligence agency, which said Friday that Russia had “re-energized” its assault on Bakhmut as traditional Russian forces and the Wagner fighters “have improved cooperation.”

The Defense Ministry’s acknowledgment this week of Wagner’s leading role in the assault, as well as coordination with regular forces, appeared to mark a shift. Leaked classified documents that recently emerged showed that tensions between Wagner and Russia’s defense ministry at one point had gotten so bad that President Vladimir V. Putin personally intervened, calling Mr. Prigozhin and Defense Minister Sergei K. Shoigu into a meeting.

The defense ministry’s claims of joint action in Bakhmut, which began on Tuesday, come as Russian military bloggers have posted unverified videos purporting to show paratrooper artillery providing fire cover for Wagner’s fighters in Bakhmut.

Such videos, which The New York Times has not independently verified, claim to demonstrate the kind of support that Mr. Prigozhin has for weeks publicly requested to fully capture of Bakhmut after months of heavy fighting.

For their part, Ukrainian commanders have portrayed the presence of Russian special forces in the battle as a sign of Wagner’s exhaustion.

“They are forced to reinforce themselves” with paratroopers, Serhyi Cherevatyi, the spokesman for Ukraine’s eastern command, told a Ukrainian television station on Friday. He added that both Wagner forces and regular Russian units were taking heavy losses in the fighting.

The battle for Bakhmut has turned into a bleeding sore for the Russian and Ukrainian militaries, erasing entire neighborhoods and sapping their armies. No independent count of the dead and wounded has been possible, and each side is seen as inflating the other’s losses while concealing its own.

Credit...
Roman Pilipey/Getty Images
BEIJING — China sought a balance on Friday in its stance on the war in Ukraine, announcing that its defense minister would start a four-day visit on Sunday to Russia even as China’s foreign minister reasserted that his country would not supply weapons to either side in the conflict.

China has tilted toward Russia throughout the conflict, which began last year less than three weeks after President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia and Xi Jinping, China’s top leader, declared a “no limits” friendship. Amid concerns about a deepening military relationship between Beijing and Moscow, European and American officials have repeatedly called on China not to let that friendship extend to supplying weapons.

Foreign Minister Qin Gang of China spoke at a news conference in Beijing on Friday alongside his German counterpart, Annalena Baerbock. Mr. Qin said that China had adopted a “prudent and responsible attitude” regarding the export of military items.

“China will not provide weapons to relevant parties of the conflict, and manage and control the exports of dual-use items in accordance with laws and regulations,” he said, according to The Associated Press.

The remarks came after a cache of leaked classified U.S. documents shed light on recent U.S. warnings that China was considering sending lethal weapons to Russia. The documents cite signals intercepts from the Russian Foreign Intelligence Service reporting that Beijing had “approved the incremental provision of lethal aid to Russia’s war in Ukraine.” Chinese officials have consistently denied plans to supply weapons and U.S. officials have said they have seen no evidence of any weapons transfers.

Senior Col. Tan Kefei, the spokesman of the Ministry of National Defense, announced in a separate statement on Friday that Defense Minister Li Shangfu would visit Moscow from Sunday to Wednesday.

“In recent years, under the strategic guidance of the two heads of state, Sino-Russian military relations have continued to operate at a high level, and new progress has been made in strategic communication, joint exercises and practical cooperation,” said Senior Colonel Tan, who also mentioned “the comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination between China and Russia in the new era.”

Mr. Qin and Mr. Li are also state councilors, a higher rank than minister that gives them broad authority over their areas of policymaking.

Show more
Credit...
Michael A. McCoy for The New York Times
Russia’s ambassador to the United States said that Washington had threatened to retaliate if Moscow did not release the Wall Street Journal reporter Evan Gershkovich, who was arrested in Russia and charged with espionage, marking a new low in tensions between the two countries.

The ambassador, Anatoly Antonov, told Russian television’s Channel One that he recently had a “very tough” conversation with Victoria Nuland, the under secretary of state for political affairs, who he said had accused Russia of illegally detaining Mr. Gershkovich.

“The Americans threatened us with retaliatory measures if we do not release Gershkovich in the near future,” Mr. Antonov said in the televised interview on Thursday. “I tried to calm them down,” he said. “We shall see how they will act.”

It was not immediately possible to verify Mr. Antonov’s claim. Ms. Nuland had summoned the Russian ambassador to a meeting at the agency’s headquarters on the same day that Mr. Gershkovich appeared in a court in Moscow, where he was formally arrested on charges of espionage. The State Department said at the time that Ms. Nuland had criticized Russia’s detention of the Wall Street Journal reporter.

On Monday, the State Department designated Mr. Gershkovich as “wrongfully detained,” which means that the U.S. government sees him as the equivalent of a political hostage and reflects its belief that the charges are fabricated.

American officials and The Wall Street Journal have vehemently denied the accusation that Mr. Gershkovich was engaged in any kind of spying activity. The case has prompted outpourings of support from Mr. Gershkovich’s colleagues and press freedom groups.

Mr. Gershkovich’s detention in late March, the first arrest of a Western journalist in Russia on espionage charges since the Cold War, has had a chilling effect on the international press corps in Moscow. The State Department designation of Mr. Gershkovich as “wrongfully detained” also reflects a concern among U.S. officials that his case appears to signal an even more severe Kremlin crackdown on independent news media and the free flow of information within the country.

In his interview with Channel One, Mr. Antonov also suggested that it might be time to reduce the number of American journalists working in Russia, bringing it down to match the number of Russian journalists working in the United States. His comments appeared to be in reference to claims from Moscow that Russian journalists have encountered difficulty getting visas to work in the United States.

On Thursday, President Vladimir V. Putin’s spokesman, Dmitri S. Peskov, denied an earlier report by Bloomberg that the Russian president personally approved the arrest of Mr. Gershkovich. He also reiterated that Mr. Gershkovich was caught “red-handed.” The Russian authorities have not provided any evidence to back up their accusations.

Russia’s deputy foreign minister, Sergei A. Ryabkov, has signaled that it was too soon to discuss a swap for Mr. Gershkovich. On Thursday, he reiterated those sentiments and said the issue of exchange could be considered only once justice runs its course, according to Tass, a Russian state news agency. A typical espionage case can take around two years between arrest, court verdict and appeal, according to Russian lawyers.

The Biden administration has called for Russia to immediately release Mr. Gershkovich. It has also demanded that he receive consular access.

Maria Zakharova, a spokeswoman for the Russian Foreign Ministry, said on Wednesday that the issue should be resolved “in due time.”

Image
Ukrainian drone footage analysts near Bakhmut, Ukraine, in January. Russia has used extensive jamming of GPS signals during the war to interfere with drone operations.
Credit...
Nicole Tung for The New York Times
WASHINGTON — Russia has used extensive jamming of GPS signals during the war in Ukraine to interfere with drone operations but has refrained from using more advanced weaponry to blind optical satellites, according to a report published on Friday by a research organization.

Space-based intelligence assets have played a major role in the yearlong war, and satellite jamming has served as a key defensive measure. But the kind of fighting in space that could result in disabling or destroying satellites, like, for example, using lasers to blind optical satellites, has not occurred on a wide scale.

“Russia is using some counter-space weapons on the battlefield,” said Kari A. Bingen, a former top Pentagon intelligence official now with the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington. “We highlight jamming or interference with GPS navigations satellites.”

But given how significant a role commercial surveillance has played in the war, it is surprising that Russia has not employed more weapons, she said.

Her comments came as the research organization, C.S.I.S., released its annual “Space Threat Assessment” on Friday, which this year took a close look at how Ukraine and Russia have used, and failed to use, weapons meant to counter satellites.

Russia, according to the new report, has developed weapons that use lasers to temporarily or permanently blind satellites used to collect battlefield images. Because commercial and spy satellites have collected so much information about Russian troop movements, some experts had thought Russia might do more to try to blind those satellites. But that has not been the case, according to the report.

“It could be that their antisatellite capabilities are not as effective as they thought they would be,” Ms. Bingen said. “It could be they are deterred. Or it could be we don’t understand Russian doctrine as well as we thought we did.”

While Russia has not hesitated to try jamming communications with satellites, it may view attacking a satellite directly — like by blinding it in a way that could cause permanent damage — as an escalatory move.

Russia has tried to jam commercial communications satellites like SpaceX’s Starlink network, according to the report. But the C.S.I.S. researchers said that SpaceX programmers had agile, iterative updates to their systems that allowed them to overcome those Russian jamming efforts.

But the importance of commercial satellite imagery and satellite communications for Ukraine’s success shows that fighting in space is becoming ever more likely, Ms. Bingen said.

Show more
For weeks after Russian troops forcibly removed Natalya Zhornyk’s teenage son from his school last fall, she had no idea where he was or what had happened to him.

Then came a phone call.

“Mom, come and get me,” said her son, Artem, 15. He had remembered his mother’s phone number and borrowed the school director’s cellphone.

Ms. Zhornyk made him a promise: “When the fighting calms down, I will come.”

Artem and a number of schoolmates had been loaded up by Russian troops and transferred to a school farther inside Russian-occupied Ukraine.

While Ms. Zhornyk was relieved to know where he was being held, reaching him would not be easy. They were now on different sides of the front line of a full-blown war, and border crossings from Ukraine into Russian-occupied territory were closed.

But months later, when a neighbor brought back one of her son’s schoolmates, she learned about a charity that was helping mothers bring their children home.

Since it is illegal for men of military age to leave Ukraine now, in March Ms. Zhornyk and a group of women assisted by Save Ukraine completed a nerve-racking, 3,000-mile journey through Poland, Belarus and Russia to gain entry to Russian-occupied territory in eastern Ukraine and Crimea to retrieve Artem and 15 other children.

Then they had to take another circuitous journey back.

Show more
Credit...
Daniel Berehulak/The New York Times
Leaked U.S. intelligence documents indicate that Ecuador’s right-wing government in recent months considered sending Soviet-designed MI-17 helicopters to Ukraine, a move supported by the United States.

Ecuador would have been the first Latin American country to send weapons to Kyiv, according to the documents. It was not clear from the leaked documents whether Ecuador followed through.

Ecuador’s Foreign Ministry denied any negotiations with Ukraine on Thursday, saying in a statement that a “donation of military goods and supplies is not mentioned in the Ecuadorean legislation, so an operation of these characteristics would be impossible.”

The political and economic relationship between Ecuador and Russia grew close under the presidency of Rafael Correa, according to Juan Carlos Herrera, an international law professor in Quito with a focus on Russia and Ukraine. Mr. Correa, a leftist, served from 2007 to 2017.

In 2021, Ecuador’s exports to Russia totaled nearly $1 billion — its fifth biggest destination after the United States, China, Panama and Chile.

But Mr. Herrera said that Ecuador’s relationship with Russia had been strained since the war in Ukraine began, in February 2022. The country’s president, Guillermo Lasso, condemned Russia’s invasion immediately and expressed his full support to President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine in a phone call last June.

In a leaked analysis labeled “top secret” and dated February of this year, U.S. intelligence officials wrote that the Russian military recommended suspending economic ties with Ecuador if the helicopter transfer occurred.

The analysis offers a window into the geopolitical balance many countries are trying to strike as the war drags on.

At least three of Latin America’s largest countries — Argentina, Brazil and Colombia, all led by leftists — have refused to send weapons to Ukraine, with leaders arguing that they will not take sides in the war.

Vladimir Rouvinski, a political scientist at Icesi University in Colombia who studies Russian relations with Latin America, said Latin American countries were trying to stay out of the conflict “because they are afraid.”

“They are not sure how this war is going to end, how the new rules of the game are going to be,” he said. “They are worried about the change in the international order.”

According to the leaked U.S. intelligence assessment, Ecuador was hoping to send its aging MI-17 helicopters to Ukraine and persuade the United States to provide alternative aircraft. Ecuadorean officials had asked for U.S. support for providing the Soviet-era helicopters to Kyiv.

The potential transfer was first reported by Ecuadorean news media in January.

It remains unclear if American officials made a firm promise to replace the Ecuadorean aircraft should they be sent to Kyiv, or even if the arrangement moved forward.

But Laura Richardson, the commander of the U.S. Southern Command, said at an Atlantic Council discussion in January that the government was working with Latin American countries to donate Russian equipment to Ukraine and replace it with U.S. equipment. She added that they were “taking advantage” of Russia’s inability to provide the countries with new military equipment.

Ecuadorean officials knew that sending their old weapons to Kyiv could anger their trading partner Moscow, the leaked analysis said.

The analysis goes on to say that the Ecuadoreans were still likely to donate the helicopters to Ukraine — but added that they could also change their minds.

“Without prompt U.S. logistic support,” the analysis says, “Ecuador may reconsider its planned donation in the face of Russian economic pressure and domestic political pressure.”